In this video, I will introduce you to using the colab environment that is provided by Google and connects
to not only Python back end, but also GPUs that we can use for investigating and building and training
large language models.
Okay, so to get to Colab, first of all, you need a Google account that is free to open and then you
can go to Colab.research.google.com.
Or you can just Google search for Colab research, and then you will find it and you open up a new notebook
and you will get something that looks like this.
It's always very intimidating to see these empty files, whether it's like a word doc and you have to
write something or a code file.
But don't worry, we will fill all this stuff in with beautiful, amazing code.
Okay, so this is one option to go directly to this website
You can also open up new notebook files in Colab if you are in Google Drive.
So here I'm at my drive.
I've created a folder for this LM course and now there's nothing in here.
But I am going to right click and more and then you will see Google Colab.
So that is just another way to automatically create an empty Python notebook file in this folder.
And then it will immediately open it up in Colab, like what you see here.
Okay, so if this is your first time ever looking at a colab notebook, then I encourage you to take
a few minutes just to browse around and see what is available in these notebooks.
So for example, we can go to open we can open a new notebook.
So you have several possibilities for opening notebooks.
You can open an existing notebook from your Google Drive.
This is useful when you already have several notebooks available.
Here's a nice feature we can cancel this.
Don't actually need to connect to GitHub right now.
So if you select GitHub then here you can enter a GitHub repo.
So for example I will just search for my own.
And here so this is for my GitHub site.
And then you can see all the repos that I have here.
So for example I don't know let's do uh this one calculus book.
So now I can click on one of these files.
And that will just automatically open.
So it pulls the notebook file off of GitHub and it will open it here.
So then yeah we can start working with this notebook file here that I have gotten from GitHub.
Now don't worry if you make changes here.
That's not actually going to change the file on my GitHub.
You can save this after modifying it, you can save it locally.
Okay, but that's not what I want to do here.
What I want to do is just open up a fresh notebook here.
So I'm going to close this.
It's giving me a warning message because I've made changes but that's fine.
Okay.
So here I have my beautifully titled, very clear titled notebook here.
Anyway, so that was about opening notebooks.
Um, you can also, once you've been working on a notebook, you can save a copy in your Google Drive.
If you have a GitHub account, you can save it directly in GitHub.
You can also download the file either as a notebook or as a raw Python file.
To be honest, if you are watching this video then it means you are probably fairly new, maybe completely
new, but at least a little bit new to Python.
In which case I recommend not worrying about downloading to locally and also not worrying about saving
to a GitHub.
Instead, I recommend keeping all these files organized on your Google Drive.
Certainly for now it just makes things a little bit easier.
Other menu options you probably don't really need to worry about here is a relevant one.
If you click on runtime.
Then we look down to the option change runtime type.
So by default you get connected to a CPU.
So we're not yet connected to a CPU, but we will in a moment.
And that is going to connect us to Python.
You know Google Colab supports some other languages as well.
But here we're only going to be working with Python.
Uh, yeah.
So by default you get access to a CPU, which is great for lots and lots of applications, lots and
lots of explorations.
Once we start getting into working with large, large language models, then we're going to need to
switch to GPUs.
Now depending on your location and whether you pay for Colab Pro, you might only see you know.
You might not see as many GPU options here, but you'll certainly have at least one GPU option.
And so yeah, I'll talk about this more later in the course.
But basically, when you are working with these really large deep learning models, you really need
to use the GPU.
This is going to be the difference between waiting seconds versus waiting hours for your model to process.
Okay, but all that said, if you do not need to use a GPU, then you should stick to the CPU.
The CPU is better to connect to unless you really need the GPU.
Okay, uh, let's see, there's also some options here.
Uh, but I'm not going to.
Yeah, we don't really need to worry about these options for the moment, but there are some interesting
things to work with here on the left side panel, like exploring the files that we are creating, but
we will get to that later.
Okay, so now this is a code cell.
This is called a code cell that is grayed out area.
In here we can add more code cells either through let's see insert code cell.
You can also if you mouse over the top or the bottom, that will give you an option to add more code
cells like this.
You can do these anywhere.
You can also add text cells.
That is for making notes for yourself.
If you want to make longer notes, you know notes go here okay.
And then yeah you can also like stylize these and so on.
Add pictures and whatever.
But mostly you know, most of these cells in your notebook file will be code files.
So these are the cells that you write code into.
So your code will go here.
You can start off very simple.
Just four plus four okay.
Now the way to think about so you can add multiple code cells and multiple lines of code in one code
cell.
The way to think about a code cell is like a paragraph in a text.
So you.
If you're writing a text, if you're writing a document, you have words.
And you know, these individual little pieces of code are kind of like words.
And you have sentences which is kind of like a line of code, and then you have paragraphs, and a paragraph
would be like this entire code cell here.
So this is something to keep in mind when you're organizing your code.
If you have hundreds of lines of code, you probably don't want it all to go in one code cell.
Just like if you are writing a document or report, you don't want to have, you know, a 5000 word
essay.
That's just one paragraph.
So you separate out things, okay?
And then you can also use these text cells to separate sections so you can say, you know, this section
involves training a language model.
Okay.
So now and then below, you know, maybe we have some more code in here.
And then below we're going to have another section.
And it's going to be this section involves testing a trained model something like this.
Okay.
So then you know this is just a way to help you organize your code and help you see where you are.
So now I have written some Python code, but right now this is not actually connected to a Python server.
We're not actually running any code.
I've just written some text in here.
What we need to do is connect our notebook here.
This, you know, just this text here to a Python server that's sitting, you know, in a cloud server
somewhere.
I don't know where Google stores all these different servers.
Okay.
There's a couple of ways that you can connect to a server.
One is by clicking this button over here.
So you say it's going to say a couple of different things.
It might say connect or unconnected or reconnect.
It actually automatically connected when I opened up this tab a few minutes ago.
So now yeah you can see now it's connecting.
If you are not connected over here, you just click this button and it will automatically connect.
So this is great.
Now we are actually connected to a compute engine back end.
This means we can start running the code that we have written here.
Now if you don't know anything about Python code, that's fine.
You're going to learn about that in, you know, starting in the next video.
But what the idea is that you put your code as text into each of these cells, and then you actually
evaluate, you tell Python to run that code by in a number of ways.
So you can press this little button over here.
It tells you how long it took to get the green check mark, indicating that the code cell was run.
It took zero seconds and it output.
It gave an output.
Now, code cells don't always give an output, but sometimes they do.
Okay.
So you can click this button here.
There's keyboard shortcuts that you can use on the Mac.
It is command enter that also runs the cell.
And notice that the cursor stayed in here on Windows and Linux it would be a control enter.
Another keyboard shortcut is shift enter.
So when I press shift enter watch what happens to the cursor.
Now it's in this cell.
And now I press shift enter.
It runs this code.
And then it moved the cursor to the next cell.
Okay.
And you can see there I go to the next cell and the next cell and the next cell.
And then let me put something in here.
Uh, junk code.
This is not real code.
I just want something in here for you to see.
Okay, so if I press shift enter, then I go to the next cell.
There's another option, which is to press either option, enter on the Mac or Alt, enter on a Windows
or Linux computer, and then it runs the current code cell and it adds a new one.
So you see we got this new code cell that is before this one over here.
Okay.
So that's about running the code in this cell.
Uh, the last uh well, one more thing I want to show you is that sometimes it happens that your Python
session just gets really zonked up.
So sometimes just everything is going wrong.
You don't know what the problem is, and you just want to clear the workspace and start again.
You want to delete your session.
So there's a couple of different ways you can just, you know, nuclear attack everything and start
again from scratch.
You can click up to runtime and you can do restart session.
Uh, that is one option that will.
You can see this warning message.
Are you sure you want to restart?
This will basically delete all the local variables.
So all the variables that you've created, all the work that you've done in Python is going to be deleted.
Now, just to be super duper clear, nothing happens to the code.
You'll see this.
Now I say yes.
Nothing happens to the code.
Your code is perfectly safe.
Nothing happens to any of the text in this file.
What gets deleted is all the variables that you've created, all of the settings that you have defined,
all the parameters that you've defined.
So all of the variables that you created, things you might have imported from online or from other
libraries, those all get reset when you do that option.
Another option for resetting Python is if you click on this arrow up here and you can say disconnect
and delete runtime again, that will give you this warning message.
All of the local variables will be lost.
Your code does not get lost.
Nothing happens to your code.
Your code is safe.
It's just all of the work that you've done in Python gets deleted.
Okay, but sometimes you need to do that.
All right.
The last thing I want to show you here is how to change the name of these files.
So you can see the file names up here.
Untitled five is a terrible name for a file.
So you want to call this?
You know, my work is great.
Okay.
This is also not a great file name.
How about something like, uh, learn Python variables?
Okay, so this might be what you call the notebook file for the next video.
Okay.
And you want to leave this extension here Ipynb.
This stands for interactive.
The I is for interactive.
The Pi is for Python and the NB is for notebook.
So that is a specific file name that goes with these kinds of notebooks.
Oh, I forgot there was one more thing I wanted to show you.
And that is if you go to tools and then settings here you can change some notebook settings.
So for example, when I record these videos I use a large font because I want to make sure you can see
all of you know everything that I'm typing, regardless of your screen size.
But you know, this is a little bit big if you're just working on your own.
So maybe you want, you know, something like this, maybe that's a better thing.
And then, you know, you can also explore some other options.
There is, for example, AI assistants.
I prefer to hide the AI features, the generative AI features while I'm teaching, just because I find
it gets distracting and annoying, both for me and for you.
But maybe that's something you want to play around with and.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, um, then we are happy with this, and I just want to move it somewhere.
So you can see in this folder that I created in the beginning of this video.
I still don't see this file.
So where actually is this file.
Where did it go.
Where is this stored?
Uh, so we can say, uh, we can move this file.
You can save it as save a copy in your drive.
Or if this is somewhere else in your drive, you can move it and then, uh.
Yeah.
Let's see.
I'm going to put it in this folder LM course.
And now it's saved over there.
Now I can go back here and I see this file here.
So now in the future now I'm going to close this in the future.
Uh, you can come back to your Google drive over here, and you can either double click on this file
or, uh, open with Google Colab and that will open it up again.
There we go.
Now we have our original file back.